jsonrpc blog post without dark theme (#1047)
deltachat/deltachat-pages: _posts/2025-02-01-why-jsonrpc-bindings-exist.md

author: treefit
image: ../assets/blog/2024-11-10-why-jsonrpc-bindings-exist/jsonrpc-vs-cffi-thumbnail.png
# com_id:
render_toc: true
excerpt: This is a technical post about why we created the jsonrpc bindings additionally to our cffi bindings. Learn something about the internals of how Delta Chat is implemented.
---

> Foremost this is a quite technical post, read our other blog posts if you want to read something more targeted at end users.

If you have not yet looked at the Delta Chat source code,
you might not know yet that we have a core library that is used by all UI implementations.
This means the core features like encryption, email protocols,
chat and message management are using the same code on in all our apps (desktop, Android, iOS).
This has the following benefits:

- Because our Core library does all the heavy work and exposes easy methods such as `getAccounts`, `getChatlist`, `getChatContacts` and so on, it's much less work maintaining our apps on all platforms, because they basically only need to implement the UI.
- The core library is thoroughly tested with rust unit tests and integration tests in Python that actually transfer e-mails.

> - The core library can easily be used to write bots and new apps/clients (like DeltaTouch, a client for Ubuntu touch made by a community member in about a year, read the [blog post](./2023-07-02-deltatouch)).

Author: mentioning some functions in the first point was done purposefully to show that the api is really highlevel and easy to use.

> - The core library can easily be used to write bots and new apps/clients (like DeltaTouch, a client for Ubuntu touch made by a community member in about a year, read the [blog post](./2023-07-02-deltatouch)).

Reviewer: Maybe a 4th bullet point?

## The C Foreign Function Interface

The C Foreign Function Interface, short CFFI was the first way to link to core.
It was introduced back when Björn started the Delta Chat project.
He wrote the [core in C](https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-core) and forked the Signal android app for the UI,
which is written in Java, so the core is connected via CFFI[^CFFI] and [JNI](https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-android/blob/main/jni/dc_wrapper.c) (java native interface).

> Later [when we moved the core to rust](https://delta.chat/en/2019-05-08-xyiv#the-coming-delta-chat-rustocalypse) the CFFI stayed,

Author: rewrote sounds a bit like we rewrote it from scratch, which we did not, at least not at once - we used a c2rust converter then converted the code it spit out to be "real" rust code not just a representation of the c code in rust.

#define DC_CONNECTIVITY_WORKING              3000
#define DC_CONNECTIVITY_CONNECTED            4000
int dc_get_connectivity(dc_context_t* context);

typedef struct _dc_chatlist  dc_chatlist_t;
dc_chatlist_t* dc_get_chatlist(
  dc_context_t* context,
  int flags,
  const char* query_str,
  uint32_t query_id
);
size_t    dc_chatlist_get_cnt(
  const dc_chatlist_t* chatlist
);
uint32_t  dc_chatlist_get_chat_id(
  const dc_chatlist_t* chatlist,
  size_t index
);
uint32_t  dc_chatlist_get_msg_id(
  const dc_chatlist_t* chatlist,
  size_t index
);
dc_lot_t* dc_chatlist_get_summary(
  const dc_chatlist_t* chatlist,
  size_t index,
  dc_chat_t* chat
);
void      dc_chatlist_unref(
  dc_chatlist_t* chatlist
);
```

The majority of methods provide a pointer to a Rust structure, which can be used to access its properties through specialized methods.
After using it, you need to free it using the `_unref` methods (like `dc_chatlist_unref`), otherwise you will create memory leaks.

<a id="why-implement-a-new-way"></a>
## Why implement a new way to talk to core? 

While using the CFFI in android and iOS was working fine, in the desktop version which is based on electron it had some problems.

> The main problem was that Electron is a full browser which uses multiple processes,
> and you can't easily pass pointers to C-structs over process boundaries,
> ignoring that this would a bad idea[^bad-idea].
> On Android and iOS, you can just call Delta Chat core from the UI thread,
> because this thread is in the same process the Delta Chat core library was linked to and not a completely different process like in electron.
> So we ended up writing a JSON API on top of the Node.js NAPI bindings on top of the C bindings,
> more about that below in the comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main problem with this approach, is that Electron is a full browser and uses multiple processes.
You can't easily pass pointers to C-structs over process boundaries,
ignoring that this would a bad idea[^bad-idea].

On Android and iOS, you can just call Delta Chat core from the UI thread,
because this thread is in the same process the Delta Chat core library was linked to and not a completely different processes as in Electron.
So we ended up writing a JSON API on top of the Node.js NAPI bindings on top of the C bindings.
More about that below in the comparison.
```

> [^bad-idea]: Why is passing memory pointers across process boundaries potentially dangerous?
> Two main reasons: you still need to free/cleanup the remote resource after using it
> and common tools will be unable to remind you of the need to do this, because they won't understand what you are doing.
> Another potential issue lies in implementation, if you just do the easy thing and pass raw memory locations as numbers,
> then congratulations, you just added a really big security issue,
> since most exploits begin by accessing memory that they were not supposed to
> (use after free, access to out of bounds memory and so on). Though if you're lucky it just crashes. 
> 
> The other problem in desktop that it is basically single threaded and while Delta Chat core uses async rust, 
> the CFFI blocks on nearly all calls (note the `block_on`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^bad-idea]: Wondering why passing pointers across process boundaries can be dangerous?
There are 3 main reasons:
 - You still need to free/cleanup the remote resource after using it
and common tools are unable to remind you of the need. Because they don't understand what you are doing.

 - Another potential issue lies in the implementation. If you just do the easy thing and pass raw memory locations as numbers, then congratulations! You just added a really big security issue. Most exploits begin by accessing memory that they are not supposed to. Some examples include dangling pointers and out of bounds memory access. If you are lucky, it will just crash. If unlucky, wait for a CVE. 

 - Finally yet another problem is that Desktop is basically single threaded and while Delta Chat core uses `async` Rust, 
the CFFI blocks on nearly all calls (note the `block_on`):
```

Reviewer: fixed

```rust
pub unsafe extern "C" fn dc_get_fresh_msg_cnt(
    context: *mut dc_context_t,
    chat_id: u32,
) -> libc::c_int {
    if context.is_null() {
        eprintln!("ignoring careless call to dc_get_fresh_msg_cnt()");
        return 0;
    }
    let ctx = &*context;

    block_on(async move {
        ChatId::new(chat_id)
            .get_fresh_msg_cnt(ctx)
            .await
            .unwrap_or_log_default(ctx, "failed to get fresh msg cnt") as libc::c_int
    })
}
```

> In android and iOS, you can easily start threads or offload blocking tasks to other threads,
> but on desktop, each call blocked the main process **and** led to an unresponsive experience.
> Even though the communication between our main and UI process was already using async electron IPC,
> electron froze the UI process every time the main process was blocked.
> 
> Out of these and other frustrations, the idea for a new way to talk to core was born.
> First there was only talk, like there were discussions of what wire format to use: CBOR, message-pack or just plain JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In android and iOS, you can easily start threads or offload blocking tasks to other threads,
but on desktop, each call blocks the main process **and** leads to an unresponsive experience.
Even though the communication between our main and UI process was already using async Electron IPC,
Electron freezes the UI process every time the main process is blocked.

With all these downsides, the idea for a new way to talk to core was born.
In the beginning, there was only talk, like discussions about the wire format to use: CBOR, message-pack or just plain JSON.
```

[idiomatic and professional](https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-jsonrpc/pull/14).
He also factored out the generic jsonrpc code into a separate library and procedural macro into a dedicated Rust crate,
so that it can also be used by other projects, which was named [yerpc](https://github.com/deltachat/yerpc).

Then we merged our temporary "deltachat jsonrpc" repo into the core repo
and moved desktop over to use the new jsonrpc API,
which was easy thanks to the generated typescript bindings that gave good auto-completion.
Though it still used the CFFI and node bindings as transport (see picture below), until May 17, 2024,
when treefit migrated it to use the deltachat-rpc-server binary that uses stdio as a transport[^jsonrpc-pr].

[^jsonrpc-pr]: The PR: [use stdio binary instead of dc node & update electron to 30 & update min node to 20 #3567](https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-desktop/pull/3567).

> [RPC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call) stands for Remote Procedure Call.
> Which is basically a way to call functions/methods remotely.

Desktop architecture versions:

<figure>

> <img src="../assets/blog/2024-11-10-why-jsonrpc-bindings-exist/excalidraw-diagram-light.svg" data-dark-src="../assets/blog/2024-11-10-why-jsonrpc-bindings-exist/excalidraw-diagram-dark.svg" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<img style="max-width: 100%" src="../assets/blog/2024-11-10-why-jsonrpc-bindings-exist/excalidraw-diagram-light.svg" data-dark-src="../assets/blog/2024-11-10-why-jsonrpc-bindings-exist/excalidraw-diagram-dark.svg" />
```

Otherwise it's like this:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d936ed6e-d600-4c93-9ee9-f10e1703b62b)

Also consider modifying the CSS file instead.
